This is an interview with Roberto Garcia by
Leticia Garcia on April 23rd in Palestine, Texas
concerning the Vietnam War. In the interest of
accumulating knowledge about the war, I am going
to donate this tape to the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you? Yes, that's all right with me.
I'd like to start off by getting a brief background
of your military career, such as why and when you
joined, to give us an understanding of your
experiences before Vietnam. To better
understand where I came from, you might say I was
raised in a large family in a farming community. My
father was a small farmer, my mother a housewife. I
have a high school education. I graduated in May of
1955. After graduating, I worked for four years,
after four years of working in a company where I was
a stock boy, I decided that life was a little
unexciting. I thought that I wanted to do better
things. I decided that the military was about the
best way that I could do it. So in December of 1958, I
joined the military service. I took basic
training, advanced individual training, and
was, subsequent to that, assigned to a signal
company in Fairbanks, Alaska for two years. After
completing my overseas tour in Alaska, I came
back. I served approximately a year in Fort
Benning, Georgia, again as a communicator. I was
separated from the service in March of 1962.
I stayed out for approximately three months after
having been a civilian again for approximately
three months. I decided that life in the military
was not all that bad and I rejoined the military.
Can you tell me when you were sent to Vietnam why you
went and your initial reactions to going? I went to
Vietnam. I had rejoined the military service. I
was stationed with a tactical communications
company in Fort Riley, Kansas. I had been in the
Army, back in the Army, approximately four
months. One day I was called to the company and I was
informed that I had orders for Germany. I was happy
about the assignment because I had not been to
Germany. And I lived with that for approximately
one week. In about a week they called me back into
the company and told me that my orders for Germany
had been cancelled and that I was being sent to
Vietnam. Vietnam at that time was a very small
insurgency guerrilla warfare type of a thing
going on. I was elated. I looked upon it as an
adventure, something that very few people were
doing at that time, going to Vietnam, and I was
really looking forward to it. Did your initial
thoughts change after you had been there, say,
like a couple months or so? Well, yes, in a way. I
went to Vietnam, and it didn't take me long to find
out that it was not really an exciting thing. It was
new, everything that we did from day to day, or the
experiences that we went through, I guess you
might say, were still new. However, after, say,
three or four months, we more or less, or I more or
less, settled upon a routine. And I found it
somewhat boring. The thoughts that I had about
Vietnam was that it was going to be an exciting
place, something Exciting happened every day and
I found much too much. Much to my dismay that this
would not be a case. Can you tell me like the
conditions of the country at the time that you
want? What were they like? Well, the conditions
over there.
Even though they were somewhat different than
what I would have expected to find.
Were that it is a very poor country, that people
live very poorly.
Their facilities
are not anywhere near what they are here in the
United States. Transportation at that time, and I
imagine that it's still the same, was almost
nonexistent. As far as modern transportation,
the people still depended upon bicycles as their
main means of transportation. The people live in
very poor houses. Their income is almost nothing
in comparison to ours. They do not have the
furniture or the appliances that we accept as an
everyday common thing here in the United States.
What was your unit's mission in support of the war,
and how did you fit in as far as your duties went? The
unit that I was assigned to was the 232nd Signal
Company, parentheses,
Combat Support, close the parentheses. We were
responsible for establishing communications,
and by communications I mean teletype and
communication center and telephone
communications from major headquarters to major
headquarters and down to a certain extent to
subordinate level.
Initially, I served on a communication site for
approximately two months as a non-commissioned
officer in charge of a shift between 11 o'clock at
night and 7 o'clock in the morning. After
approximately three months, I was presented with
the opportunity to serve as a unit operations
sergeant. I accepted that job flatly. It was a very
challenging job. We were responsible for
administering or supervising the overall
mission
type functions of the unit. We had approximately
11 sites that we provided the support to maintain
the communications and also the planning
I'm sure you didn't work 24 hours a day all the time.
Can you tell me a little bit about what the American
soldiers did for relaxation? Yes, just like any
other place, depending upon the individual, we
all did different things, even though most of us
had some other things in common more than others.
The average soldier would, once he got off of work,
Relax for a small while. Then there were several
activities sponsored by the military. We had the
equipment to become engaged in sports
activities, if you so desired. There were
libraries that the soldier could go to and pick up a
book and maybe relax for a few minutes or a few
hours. They were not elaborate libraries. They
were somewhat limited in the number of books
available. However, the libraries were there.
There were the movies which, even though somewhat
limited, were available. The unit would petty
circuit wherein certain movies were shown
throughout the Republic of Vietnam. During the
course of a week, they would be rotated from one
place to another, and some people engaged in
watching movies. We, I think the majority of us,
became involved in two things. One was playing
cards. We would begin playing cards.
Sometime during the course of the evening,
normally not too long after supper, we would play
either poker, either for money or just for what we
termed penny ante, or we would just play for the fun
of it. And of course, just like the reputation that
had been given to the military, a lot of us got
involved in drinking and sitting and talking for
hours upon hours as a means to pass the time away.
There was also a lot of time spent in writing
letters. At that time, we didn't have the
cassettes that are available nowadays, so the
average soldier would correspond with his
family's friends back in the States, also for long
periods of time. There were other things. One of
the things that I did on the average once a week,
maybe twice a week, we would go into downtown
Saigon, which was only approximately 10 miles
from where I was stationed. That is my experience
with the average things a person would do for his
off-duty activities. Was there a big involvement
with drugs and alcohol? Initially, on my first
tour, you've got to understand that this was back
in the early 1960s, 1962, matter of fact.
Drugs were almost nonexistent. When you talk
about drugs, you were talking about a person that
was not ordinary. He was out of the ordinary. if a
person were using drugs who was not accepted as
being a person that you wanted to get involved
with. So no drugs in the sense that we use drugs in
were nonexistent at the time. The alcohol was
there, yes, the alcohol was there. Okay. Can you
tell me why the U.S. became involved in the war? Or
why you feel they became involved in the war? Our
involvement in the war stems from an agreement,
the Southeastern Asia Treaty Organization, in
which we were a partner. That agreement came into
existence, best of my knowledge, just like the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO.
Immediately after World War II,
people, the parties, the politicians in
existence at that time must have determined
that it would be wise to come up with
such organizations and to come up with such
agreements and basically what they stated was
that if I get attacked I'm going to ask for your
assistance or if I get a threat to my
party's power. Somebody is trying to usurp that
existing government.
I, if necessary, I'm going to ask for assistance
and all nations that are co-signers of that treaty
are more or less required to come to my assistance.
We were a co-signee of that treaty, so were the
Australians, so were the Philippines, so were
the Vietnamese. We had different nations
involved in that treaty. The president of Vietnam
at that time was new non-Nadim, if I remember
correctly, he evidently found it advisable to ask
for our assistance. Initially, we started by only
sending military advisors. Matter of fact, I went
as a military advisor the first time that we went
over, which meant that we were there as a guest of
that nation, that we were not involved in any war
activities other than advising the vietnamese
when i went over the first time like i say in 1962 the
advisory group was a very very small force we were
down to about approximately uh 10 15 000 american
soldiers this is army navy and air force combined
So at the time in 1962, America's involvement in
the war wasn't an active one? It was not an active
one, even though some advisors, and I'm talking
about the infantry type, the ranger type, they
would
go along with regular Vietnamese armies whenever
they went out on search and destroy missions.
Inadvertently, it was necessary that they fire in
their defense, and I'd like to reiterate that at
that time, an American soldier, even though he
carried a weapon with ammunition, was instructed
that he would only use that weapon as a means of
self-defense. In answer to your question, yes, it
was a very small part that we played at that time.
How did the Vietnamese react to the war, such as the
feelings towards Americans and their overall
attitude?
My experience or my interaction with Vietnamese
on my first tour was very limited, and I can only
speak from those limited encounters that I had
with the Vietnamese. But the impression that I got
was that initially the Vietnamese
accepted us as somewhat super beings, that their
propaganda machine had told them that we were
extremely powerful, extremely kind, and
extremely benevolent, that we were the, quote,
good guys. I also got the impression that as time
went along, the Vietnamese found out that we, to
quote them, were same thing, that we were also
human, that we were not necessarily the nice guy
that we had been talked about to be. So to begin
with, in 1962, they were pretty much supportive of
Americans? Those that I talked to were very
supportive of Americans. But like I said, as time
went along, I got the impression that they were
disenchanted with our actions. What about back
home in the United States in 1962? Were the
Americans supportive of the war? In 1962, yes, the
Americans were supportive of the war. They, at
that time, the military, that stigma to the
military was popular to serve in the defense of the
nation. The soldiers were still proud to wear the
uniform. They were looked upon with respect.
people would go out of their way to try to be helpful
to them. And generally, yes, the general public
had a favorable support for the Vietnam War. As the
war progressed through the 60s, did you note any
changes of what we just discussed, say like
America's involvement in the war? Yes, there was a
definite change in the general public's attitude
of our involvement in the war. I do not think that
the soldiers' way of thinking about the war
changed. There was, in the United States at that
time, a movement mainly at the college level to
question and attack our involvement of the war. As
this movement increased, and I might say that it
was not only at the college level, there were
certain groups, not necessarily communistic,
were 100 percent opposed to our involvement in the
war, and they very actively politicked and
questioned our involvement in the war. As the
movement became stronger, as the feelings became
stronger, as the demonstrations became
stronger, politicians for whatever their
reasons either selfish or if they in actuality
thought that our involvement was wrong,
continuously attacked our policies. They
questioned the President's authority. They
questioned the amount of money that was being
spent in the effort. They questioned the number of
lives that were being lost in the war. They
questioned the military's
decisions. They questioned their authority to
bomb another country. They questioned the
authority to pursue the enemy beyond certain
lines.
All in all, I would venture to say from the middle
60s, 1965,
through the latter part of the 60s and
particularly in the 70s until the end of the war,
the attitude of the nation did a 100%
turnabout. You mentioned a while ago that you
served as an advisor the first time you went. Was
that the same status you served as the second time
around? No. Like I mentioned, when I went over on my
first tour, we were a very small force at the time.
We were not authorized to conduct aggressive
activities. We could only fire a weapon as a matter
of self-defense. If you will remember, or if you
have read any history books, though, Sometime in
1964, August 1964, if I remember correctly, the
United States stated, even though it was
questioned by various ways,
that United States ships had been attacked by
North Vietnamese
patrol boats in the Gulf of Tonkin. We refer to it as
the Gulf of Tonkin incident. Whatever the case may
have been, the United States used that incident to
further expand its war effort,
whereas we had been maintaining a small number of
military personnel in Vietnam. Even though it had
progressed, in 1964 we had somewhere about
100,000 military personnel in Vietnam. After the
Gulf of Tonkin incident, not too long after that,
within a year, the United States had increased its
total military force to approximately 300,000,
350,000. By virtue of that, and mind you, I am not
familiar with international law, under what
circumstances
you will change from an advisor status to an active
war maker, you might say. But during that course,
anyhow, the United States dropped its advisory
status in Vietnam and became actively involved,
as you might want to term it, an aggressor force in
Vietnam. Can you tell me about your second tour in
Vietnam? Was it voluntary? Yes.
At that time, I was serving in Fort Hood, Texas. The
unit that I was in was alerted that they would be
going to Vietnam. We went through approximately
11 months of intensive preparation and training.
Because of the regulations at that time, I was
exempt from going to Vietnam unless I signed a
waiver waiving my rights to that exemption
because I had been back in Vietnam for less than 24
months. However, at the time, I had been back in the
United States 22 months and I thought that if I did
not go with that unit, that i would eventually as
soon as my 24 months were up would be going to
vietnam anyhow i considered my option uh the pros
and the cons i had people that were very
professional in that company uh i was friends with
them i knew how they operated I had trust and faith
in them. I was serving in a position of authority.
The promotions at that time, if you were serving in
the position, particularly in Vietnam, you could
almost be assured of a promotion. So I took all
these things into consideration,
figured These things that I have just talked about
on the positive side, on the contrary side, I
figured that if I did not go with a unit with people
that I already knew and respected, that I would
eventually be going separately, possibly with
another unit, people that I was not familiar with.
So consequently, yes, I signed a waiver and I did go
to Vietnam. So is this the same unit you went with
the first time? No, this was the 54th Signal
Battalion. We also provided communications at
core level down to division level. And though this
might seem strange to you, the concept is there.
It's a good concept. We're in the concept dictates
the type of support that you are required to
provide to the different echelons of command
within the Corps. And within the Corps, you take
and figure that you are serving or supporting, and
the figure may vary, but anywhere between, say, 75
to 150,000 soldiers. What about the other
soldiers that you went with? Did they want to go
voluntarily or were they dragged out there? No. My
experience was that the majority of the soldiers,
I only knew of two through my entire Vietnam
experience, that hesitated to go to Vietnam. The
average soldier wanted to go to Vietnam. I knew
quite a few even those that were married and had
families that volunteered to go to Vietnam.
This may seem somewhat strange but it's true and
the only thing that I can attribute that to is that
in the military we all like to be considered as
professionals and our job whether you want to put
that tag on it or not, is to go out there and kill. We
figured that if we did not serve in Vietnam, or
those were my thoughts anyhow, we were not doing
our job. Matter of fact,
those that did, like I said, I knew two people that
declined to go to Vietnam or did not want to go to
Vietnam. they were looked upon as being somewhat
odd. But in answer to your question, yes, the
average soldier did want to go to Vietnam, some for
patriotic reasons, even though those were very
few exceptions. I think the majority of us did it
for the professionalism. You had mentioned
earlier that back in 1962, there wasn't that big of
a problem with drugs. How about in 1965? I think the
drugs in 1965 were just beginning to surface.
Generally, not only in the military but also in
society, drugs were not a problem in the early
1960s. They were there. The heroin was there. The
morphine was there. There were none of these...
Elaborate drugs that are available now the
cocaine was almost non-existent generally At
that time it was the marijuana and in the Far East of
the opium
In the early 1960s we were going still going
through the 1940 late 1940 1950 era whereas
cigarette smoking and beer drinking, alcohol
drinking was the thing to do. So if you're asking
was there a drug problem in the sense where
the beer drinking, the alcohol consumption was
there, yes, we had that problem, if you want to call
it a problem. But in as far as taking the hard drugs,
no, it was almost nonexistent.
I, on my second tour, I served as communication
chief for a site and I had ranging anywhere between
29 and 45 was the most, I had 45 soldiers.
I became quite
Familiar with their actions, I lived with them 24
hours a day, 365 days a year, and I knew them pretty
thoroughly. And I think I can honestly say that
there was never any drugs in the number of people
that I managed and supervised. Beer drinking,
yes, we had it just about every day, but as far as
drugs, no, we didn't have it. I left Vietnam, and to
the best of my knowledge, drugs became a problem.
Hard drugs became a problem in the 1968 and 69
era. How had the relations between the Vietnamese
Americans changed between 62 and 65?
In the early 60s, in 1962, Like I say, we were still
held somewhat in awe, even though that attitude
may have been changing. In 1965, when I was there
again, I think there was a total lack of respect,
mutual respect. lack of respect between the
Vietnamese and the Americans. The Vietnamese
were taking the Americans as a means of making
money. The Americans had adopted the attitude
that the Vietnamese were lazy and didn't know how
to fight a war. Consequently, the strategy
changed at that time wherein the American soldier
was now doing all the war-making, going out and
actually fighting the war, and the Vietnamese
were more or less held back in reserve and were
providing support-type duties. There was a 100%
turnabout. There was a lack of respect. they
didn't like us and for the most part I think I can say
that the Americans did not like the Vietnamese.
What was the Vietnamese public's feelings about
the war? The general public And by the general
public, I'm talking about maybe 80, 90% of the
population. And again, I'm talking about people
that were living out in the country. They were
farmers. They were poor people. They were
uneducated. The only thing that these people knew
anything about was what they heard on the radio,
and radio was prevalent throughout Vietnam.
The general public did not really care, I'm
talking about the Vietnamese general public, did
not really care about the controversy or the
issues of the war. They were concerned about
raising their crops, raising the family, doing
the things that a family does. They were not too
politically oriented. As far as the impression
that I got, was that the general vietnamese didn't
want a part of the war they wanted to be left alone
however as the war escalated and as they lost our
respect for us and as the enemy stepped up its
propaganda and by the enemy i'm talking about the
uh the north vietnamese in particular and also the
Vietcong, as they stepped up their propaganda,
then a lot of these people that did not want a part of
the war listened to the propaganda being
broadcast or published or distributed by the
North Vietnamese. They became to accept us as the
enemy. We were no longer there in the defense of
their nation, though we were there in the defense
of a government that was by then in disfavor with
the general public. Was the Vietnamese's
attitudes about fighting the war different from
that of the Americans? The Vietnamese's you say
their their feelings the soldier i guess in any
country is
going to feel that he is doing the right thing
because he is a professional uh what their private
thoughts may have been i cannot answer that
however as a professional soldier they were more
or less bound to do whatever their superiors
command that they do. What about their tactics?
Were they different in fighting this war? The
Texas were definitely different. The United
States, I think, went over with a concept of
fighting a war like back in World War I and World War
II, and maybe even Korea, where they were definite
established battle lines. The military refers to
them as the forward edge of the battle area. In
Vietnam, there was not any such thing. The enemy
could not be identified because he was not in
uniform. The enemy did not have established
battle lines They would surface during the night
or even during the day unexpectedly. They would
conduct a raid. They would retreat. They would
become members of the general public during the
day. That was one of the major reasons,
I guess you might say, why we were not successful in
Vietnam. We did not know who the enemy was. There
were times when the enemy was found and attacked,
or there were times when the enemy would attack.
Battles would last for anywhere between a week at
the very most to 15 days. The
enemy would then dissolve, it seemed like, into
almost nothing, or he would retreat to what at that
time were considered sanctuaries. We refer to
this as guerrilla warfare, where you strike and
you retreat, where you make a stand for a few days
and then disappear. We were not prepared
for this type of insurgency type of warfare. We
were prepared and we had the firepower to fight a
conventional war. Guerrilla warfare is
definitely not a conventional type of fighting,
and we were not prepared for it. How was the
military back in the States after seeing that the
Vietnamese were fighting a guerrilla war? How did
they change their... Their concept of fighting
did not change. The United States wanted to
continue with a conventional type of warfare.
There were, of course, other means for trying to
locate. For instance, we had numbers and numbers
of helicopter units over there that would carry
the soldier to the battlefield. However, as
happened quite often, the enemy was just not
there. How could you tell the difference between
which Vietnamese were fighting with you or
against you? That was what I tried to expand upon a
few minutes ago that you did not know. It was very
common and it happened numerous times. where
Vietnamese employed by the U.S. military to
conduct menial type labor around the garrison
units were found to be Viet Cong. He
would fit in with the general Vietnamese during
the day, and during the night then he would be
fighting a different There were also numerous
instances of where these houseboys or housegirls
or kitchen workers or general laborers were used
for spying activities. They were used for
destroying American property and general
harassment. In retrospect, 24 years after you
served in Vietnam first time, have your thoughts
and attitudes changed about the war? They had
definitely changed. You've got to remember that
when I was in the military, and we're talking about
this happened 24, 25 years ago, I was completely
sold on the military. That was my job. That was my
profession. I was not necessarily brainwashed,
but I was part of the military establishment at
that time. And as far as I was concerned, we were
doing the right thing. And to a certain extent, I do
not say that we were necessarily doing the wrong
thing. In retrospect, yes. However, I think that
we had no part in that war or at very best that it was
very ill-advised.
We were trying to be part and support a government
that did not have the people's support, that
abused its position,
that got religion involved in the war. that did not
have the general vietnamese public's better
interest in mind they were being selfish trying to
use the government for their own betterment uh
that was a local war that needed to be resolved
within their own self, you've got to understand
that
got to understand that different parts of the
world, you are going to have different societies
where they do not necessarily have the same
beliefs that we in the United States do.
They also, their economy is different from ours.
Their customs are different than ours. We just had
no business trying to fight the war for them i think
it was very ill-advised thing however i also feel
that given the same circumstances
the u.s public is more or less bound to support
their government's decision if they cannot
support their government's decision, then they
also do not have the right to violently, or through
violent actions, oppose the decisions of their
country. The people select, elect the politician
to represent them at whatever levels of
government. And in a case as controversial as the
Vietnam War was, they still owe to those
politicians the respect to try to solve whatever
the problem be at whatever means available. What
are some of the reasons you feel that we lost the
war? There is several reasons, not any one of them,
that by itself contributed to the loss of the war.
First and foremost, I'm sure that anybody will
agree, was the lack of support for the war, not only
by the general public, but by the Congress of the
United States. And by Congress of the United
States, I'm talking about the fact that they
controlled the actions of the military, and they
controlled the purse strings. They controlled
the money.
The military, on one side, was being to go out and
fight and win a war.
On the other hand, you had the
political activists, the anti-Vietnam War
demonstrators, and you had your congressmen.